Hey! So, in this video I'd like to
introduce you to A Landscaping Process. It's not the landscaping process. The process
I'm going to suggest is that we start off, number 1, by sculpting hills, valleys, and flat areas.
Number 2, by then smoothing, flattening, and, if we want, putting ramps in
to create useful features in the landscape. We'll add some erosion and noise
to make the whole thing feel more organic, and then, in the future videos, not in this one,
we'll be painting the landscape using layered materials for snow lines and tree
lines and all that sort of stuff, and then, adding details, foliage, trees,
etc. But we're going to focus on the first three here. In fact, let's start with the
first one. So here's your terrain. Remember how you can move around it? One of the easiest ways
is to hold down the Right Mouse Button, push W, A, S, D, on the
keyboard to move back in the first person controls, remembering that as you roll the Mouse
Wheel you either move faster or slower OK. I'll be able to get
myself fairly high off the ground and start from there. Now, I suggest you just watch me for a few
minutes. I will introduce you to the process, and then, you'll have plenty of opportunity in the
challenge to go ahead and go crazy and make your own terrain. So we go to the
Modes tab, to Landscape, and then to Sculpt. We start on the left-hand side with the sculpt
tool. In fact, we're going to work down in this order Sculpt, Smooth, Flatten, Ramp, Erosion,
Noise. OK, so we're going to go to the top one, then the next three, then the next three. So,
once you have the Sculpt tool, we then want to say, well what shape? Circle, whatever. We're going to
stick with circle, and the falloff tells you whether it's a smooth
falloff. It shows you here the type of land it's going to make. Spherical is an interesting
one, by the way. If you start trying to paint in Spherical land, then it creates you these
really weird bubbles like this, which on a smaller scale could be quite good for say lava.
But we're just going to go with the default here, Sculpt with a Circle Brush with a
smooth falloff alright. Cool, so let me quickly talk about what these settings
do. So, what's the brush size? Well, it's the size of the outer circle. You can just see a very
faint white outer circle in centimeters. So in this case,
it's 8,000 centimeters which is 81.9 meters, which is about
a tenth of the terrain. It's about the size of one of these blocks
or it's roughly that size. You've then got the Brush Falloff, which
tells you how big the circle inside is. So, if we have no falloff, we immediately create a
perfectly sharp edged piece of terrain, which looks really weird, and
if we have lots of brush falloff then we have a much gentler tool. So, I'm going to go for
a medium middle ground. The other thing to know about is Tool Strength. With
no Tool Strength it will do nothing. With maximum Tool Strength it'll create Pinocchio's
nose, before you can blink. Look at that, out it comes!
OK, so we want to go for a sensible Tool Strength, that allows us to paint our
terrain as quickly as possible, but without
losing control of what we're doing. Alright, so you
can mess around with those. What I want to do or suggest that you do as well is, leave an area in the middle.
About half the area in the middle is flat and open,
but what we want to do is have somewhere bounding the play space. So, the first job to do really
is just to go around the outside of the play space, however you see fit, and just to make some
hills. You can cut the corners off in an organic way, and it doesn't
really matter how crazy looking they are, you can spend a lot of time in your challenge doing this and making your
terrain look beautiful. I suggest you just watch my overview first, because you'll come up with
lots of ideas about terrain features you can make. You may want to use a Spherical
Falloff Brush and layer that down the side of a hill to make something that looks a bit like
lava. You don't have to go entirely around the edges, you can do weird stuff like this.
Coming in a little bit, hitting the edge again, cutting the corners off. You know,
the more kind of organic it can feel the better really, and the idea is to make slopes that are too
steep for our tank to go up. We won't know that for sure yet, until we get in the tank and try it,
but this is the point of an iterative process. Don't worry about these scars on the land,
they'll go when we build the lighting. But you can see that very very quickly, from down here at
ground level, we have a bounded terrain now. It's clearly, we're surrounded
by a bunch of impossible mountains. So that's step 1 in the terrain creation. Create
your hills, valleys, and flat areas. We don't really have many valleys here, it's kind of a
valley going into this corner. You might want to create more valleys than this. It's up to you OK.
Oops, excuse me! I'll leave it to your creative flair. So the next
stage is smooth, flatten, and ramp, creating useful features in your terrain.
So again, in this first iteration of this terrain, remember it's just the first iteration,
we don't need to spend too long on this. So, we go Modes, Sculpt, Sculpt Tool. You must move down
to the next which is Smooth. So, you have a look around and you look for areas of
the land that are a bit jagged or not smooth, and you can just rub over them and
it will smooth out anything that looks a bit weird, like the top of these really knobby hills here,
etc. OK, another thing to tell you, by the way, back at
Sculpt is, you can hold down the Shift button, and that will actually lower the land. It will just
do the opposite, it will drop the terrain. So that's a very easy, holding down Shift,
way of dropping these things that look a bit nuts here.
OK, so Smoothing, and then Flattening does exactly what it sounds like. If you want
to create a mess or table area you can flatten. Now, be careful with
that tool. Control Z will get you out if you're in trouble. You can see all the same
set of parameters, Brush Size, etc., but firstly, the strength can be a bit
strong. And also, you want to know the Flatten Target height,
so this is a very low Flatten Target height. We might want
to, it's an Unreal unit so that's centimeters. So, say I wanted a 100 meter high
wall, then I would need to put 100 with two zeros on the end, to get that
many centimeters, and then, I'm flattening to 100 meters high. That's what's happening there
you see, and this is far too powerful and fast. And I
don't really need to do it for my purposes, but that's how you flatten.
You would then Ramp, if you wanted to. Let's not do this in this version, but that will create an actual strict
ramp. You create a start point and an end point like this. You choose a width and
you literally add a ramp in the terrain. It can be pretty cool for the tank later, but it looks very artificial
right. It looks very manmade. I wouldn't put manmade features in until we do that, until we decide
to make it look manmade. So ramping is that. Now, erosion is quite
interesting. It's got lots and lots of properties here, which actually you can just play with
it, I don't need to tell you what they do. But you can start eroding the land and that
just gives it a little bit more of an organic feel, and I would say it's
worth doing that. Just possibly everywhere but probably not on the ground
areas, it's a bit weird to have the flat ground eroded, so you might just want to go around
and erode the sides of the hills something like this. It's very quick and easy
to do. Yes it's adding complexity to the terrain, but it shouldn't affect the performance
much, because the quads are already there. All you're doing is deforming and moving these
quads that are already there a little bit. So I think that it's a good thing
to do, you add entropy, disorder, or
you know organic feeling nature
to the terrain, by making it just less uniform less
smooth. So, definitely I would suggest it's worth putting at least some
in there without going crazy. And then, you've got other tools like Hydro
Erosion and Noise. Noise can raise some interesting effects. Be careful with it, it's very strong. Look what it
does to the terrain! It's crazy, looks very very unnatural, but a little bit of noise,
so very low strength noise may be a good thing for you to have a play
with. So, you can just have a play with that, but I don't really like it. You have to
get the right Noise Scale, otherwise your features are too small. So, with
the high Noise Scale and a low strength, you may find that a bit of noise,
again typically on the slopes, will
just make things feel and look a little bit more organic. Now, obviously they're no
textures on this landscape, at the moment, but that will obviously change
later. We'll talk about how the texturing and the laying works, and then, we can
actually make this thing look a lot more interesting. So I'm just standing kind of in a middle viewpoint here,
just roughly slapping on some noise OK, and the final thing
I want to do is just go down to the ground layer. I'm going to rebuild the
lighting. Build lighting only to, let's just say, Preview quality. That's
good enough. And then, that will get rid of all of these artifacts, and I'll just have
a quick buzz around the landscape and we're pretty much done. It'll be time to send you into
a challenge, which is to actually do this stuff yourself. Now, while
I wait for the lighting to build, let's recap the process. You sculpt the hills, valleys, flat areas.
Smooth, flatten and ramp. I would avoid the ramps for now.
Then, do your erosion and noise, make it look more organic, and then later, and they're in
gray because we're not doing them in this video, we're going to paint.
We're going to create some layered materials, and then, paint those on for things like you know low lying green
grass lands and then maybe rocky slopes and then maybe snowy tops to
mountains but not all in one video. And then, we'll add details later. Things like foliage, trees,
etc. We probably won't do any of that, actually, until we've got a vehicle in
and we've started to work on that side of things. I want to iterate around the whole loop,
the whole process. This terrain is an OK starting point.
So, let's go back, let my lighting build finish, and then, it'll be time to pop you into a
challenge. We can pretty much preview the terrain, without even letting the build finish, it's
just that these scars caused by the division between the components of the landscape
are very distracting. But you can see that this is looking, you know, reasonably feasible,
isn't it already? And the great thing is that once we are clamped to the ground, once we're a vehicle that can't leave
the ground, it's kind of a believable scenario right? We've got a
sun and a sky and some mountains that we can't pass, for some really weird reason. You do
kind of ask the question, well how on earth did anybody ever get to this place in the first place?
It's a bit weird when there's no way out. So, there's other things
you could do there perhaps, like maybe make a gap in the mountains and a
blocked road or something or make a much bigger terrain
or series of terrains that we stitch together. But we're not doing any of that in this
section, we're going for city scale and focusing on vehicle control, etc.
So, I just want to show you that once this lighting build is complete, you see all of those scars have gone,
and it's looking much better now! So that's cool!
Let's put you in the challenge! Your challenge is to create your own version 1 landscape. Remember
you'll iterate this later. Keep it simple.
Make about a 500 by 500 meter flat area, in the middle for now. We want to
be able to drive this very simple tank around,
in an uninterrupted way at first, without worrying about our own interaction with the terrain. Then, we'll build up
the middle area later. So that's it! It'll also allow for ray casting,
and we want to start ray casting in a flat area. We're going to do this for enemy detection and
things, and we want it just simple in the middle. So, keep it simple in the middle, make your own terrain. I'm obviously not going to
show you the solution, because there is no one solution, and when you finish, please please share
your photo of this with the other students, because it'd
be great to see what you guys come up with. Spend as long or as little time on it as you like and just
enjoy it, and I'll see you on the other side!